Heart disease is a term covering any disorder of the heart.

Unlike cardiovascular disease, which describes problems with the blood vessels and circulatory system as well as the heart, heart disease refers to issues and deformities in the heart itself.

According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United Kingdom, United States, Canada, and Australia. One in every four deaths in the U.S. occurs as a result of heart disease.

Fast facts on heart disease
One in every four deaths in the U.S. is related to heart disease.
Coronary heart disease, arrhythmia, and myocardial infarction are some examples of heart disease.
Heart disease might be treated with medication or surgery.
Quitting smoking and exercising regularly can help prevent heart disease.

There are many types of heart disease that affect different parts of the organ and occur in different ways.

Congenital heart disease

This is a general term for some deformities of the heart that have been present since birth. Examples include:

Septal defects: There is a hole between the two chambers of the heart.
Obstruction defects: The flow of blood through various chambers of the heart is partially or totally blocked.
Cyanotic heart disease: A defect in the heart causes a shortage of oxygen around the body.
Arrhythmia

Arrhythmia is an irregular heartbeat.

There are several ways in which a heartbeat can lose its regular rhythm. These include:

tachycardia, when the heart beats too fast
bradycardia, when the heart beats too slowly
premature ventricular contractions, or additional, abnormal beats
fibrillation, when the heartbeat is irregular
Arrhythmias occur when the electrical impulses in the heart that coordinate the heartbeat do not work properly. These make the heart beat in a way it should not, whether that be too fast, too slowly, or too erratically.

Irregular heartbeats are common, and all people experience them. They feel like a fluttering or a racing heart. However, when they change too much or occur because of a damaged or weak heart, they need to be taken more seriously and treated.

Arrhythmias can become fatal.

Coronary artery disease

The coronary arteries supply the heart muscle with nutrients and oxygen by circulating blood.

Coronary arteries can become diseased or damaged, usually because of plaque deposits that contain cholesterol. Plaque buildup narrows the coronary arteries, and this causes the heart to receive less oxygen and nutrients.

Dilated cardiomyopathy

The heart chambers become dilated as a result of heart muscle weakness and cannot pump blood properly. The most common reason is that not enough oxygen reaches the heart muscle, due to coronary artery disease. This usually affects the left ventricle.

Myocardial infarction

This is also known as a heart attack, cardiac infarction, and coronary thrombosis. An interrupted blood flow damages or destroys part of the heart muscle. This is usually caused by a blood clot that develops in one of the coronary arteries and can also occur if an artery suddenly narrows or spasms.

Heart failure

Also known as congestive heart failure, heart failure occurs when the heart does not pump blood around the body efficiently.

The left or right side of the heart might be affected. Rarely, both sides are. Coronary artery disease or high blood pressure can, over time, leave the heart too stiff or weak to fill and pump properly.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

This is a genetic disorder in which the wall of the left ventricle thickens, making it harder for blood to be pumped out of the heart. This is the leading cause of sudden death in athletes. A parent with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has a 50 percent chance of passing the disorder on to their children.

Mitral regurgitation

Also known as mitral valve regurgitation, mitral insufficiency, or mitral incompetence, this occurs when the mitral valve in the heart does not close tightly enough. This allows blood to flow back into the heart when it should leave. As a result, blood cannot move through the heart or the body efficiently.

People with this type of heart condition often feel tired and out of breath.

Mitral valve prolapse

The valve between the left atrium and left ventricle does not fully close, it bulges upwards, or back into the atrium. In most people, the condition is not life-threatening, and no treatment is required. Some people, especially if the condition is marked by mitral regurgitation, may require treatment.

Pulmonary stenosis

It becomes hard for the heart to pump blood from the right ventricle into the pulmonary artery because the pulmonary valve is too tight. The right ventricle has to work harder to overcome the obstruction. An infant with severe stenosis can turn blue. Older children will generally have no symptoms.

Treatment is needed if the pressure in the right ventricle is too high, and a balloon valvuloplasty or open-heart surgery may be performed to clear an obstruction.

The symptoms of heart disease depend on which condition is affecting an individual.

However, common symptoms include chest pain, breathlessness, and heart palpitations. The chest pain common to many types of heart disease is known as angina, or angina pectoris, and occurs when a part of the heart does not receive enough oxygen.

Angina can be triggered by stressful events or physical exertion and normally lasts under 10 minutes.

Heart attacks can also occur as a result of different types of heart disease. The signs of a heart attack are similar to angina except that they can occur during rest and tend to be more severe.

The symptoms of a heart attack can sometimes resemble indigestion. Heartburn and a stomach ache can occur, as well as a heavy feeling in the chest.

Other symptoms of a heart attack include:

pain that travels through the body, for example from the chest to the arms, neck, back, abdomen, or jaw
lightheadedness and dizzy sensations
profuse sweating
nausea and vomiting
Heart failure is also an outcome of heart disease, and breathlessness can occur when the heart becomes too weak to circulate blood.

Some heart conditions occur with no symptoms at all, especially in older adults and individuals with diabetes.

The term ‘congenital heart disease‘ covers a range of conditions, but the general symptoms include:

sweating
high levels of fatigue
fast heartbeat and breathing
breathlessness
chest pain
a blue tint to the skin
clubbed fingernails
In severe cases, symptoms can occur from birth. However, these symptoms might not develop until a person is older than 13 years.

Heart disease is caused by damage to all or part of the heart, damage to the coronary arteries, or a poor supply of nutrients and oxygen to the organ.

Some types of heart disease, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, are genetic. These, alongside congenital heart defects, can occur before a person is born.

There are a number of lifestyle choices that can increase the risk of heart disease. These include:

high blood pressure and cholesterol
smoking
overweight and obesity
diabetes
family history
a diet of junk food
age
a history of preeclampsia during pregnancy
staying in a stationary position for extended periods of time, such as sitting at work
Having any of these risk factors greatly increases the risk of heart disease. Some, such as age, are unavoidable. For example, once a woman reaches 55 years of age, heart disease becomes more likely.

There are two main lines of treatment for heart disease. Initially, a person can attempt to treat the heart condition using medications. If these do not have the desired effect, surgical options are available to help correct the issue.

Medication
A very wide range of medication is available for the majority of heart conditions. Many are prescribed to prevent blood clots, but some serve other purposes.

The main medications in use are:

statins, for lowering cholesterol
blood thinners, such as warfarin, for preventing blood clots
beta-blockers, for treating heart attack, heart failure, and high blood pressure
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, for heart failure and high blood pressure
Your doctor will work with you to find a medication that is safe and effective. They will also use medications to treat underlying conditions that can affect the heart, such as diabetes before they become problematic.

Surgery
Heart surgery is an option for people with heart disease, but it can be debilitating.
Heart surgery is an intensive option from which it can take a long time to recover.

However, they can be effective in treating blockages and heart problems for which medications may not be effective, especially in the advanced stages of heart disease.

The most common surgeries include:

angioplasty, in which a balloon catheter is inserted to widen narrowed blood vessels that might be restricting blood flow to the heart
coronary artery bypass surgery, which allows blood flow to reach a blocked part of the heart in people with blocked arteries
surgery to repair or replace faulty heart valves
pacemakers, or electronic machines that regulate a heartbeat for people with arrhythmia
Heart transplants are another option. However, it is often difficult to find a suitable heart of the right size and blood type in the required time. People are put on a waiting list for donor organs and can sometimes wait years.

Prevention
Some types of heart disease, such as those that are present from birth, cannot be prevented.

Other types, however, can be prevented by taking the following measures:

Eat a balanced diet. Stick to low-fat, high-fiber foods and be sure to consume five portions of fresh fruit and vegetables each day. Increase your intake of whole grains and reduce the amount of salt and sugar in the diet. Make sure the fats in the diet are mostly unsaturated.
Exercise regularly. This will strengthen the heart and circulatory system, reduce cholesterol, and maintain blood pressure.
Maintain a healthy body weight for your height. Click here to calculate your current and target body mass index (BMI).
If you smoke, quit. Smoking is a major risk factor for heart and cardiovascular conditions.
Reduce the intake of alcohol. Do not drink more than 14 units per week.
Control conditions that affect heart health as a complication, such as high blood pressure or diabetes.
While these steps do not completely eliminate the risk of heart disease, they can help improve overall health and greatly reduce the chances of heart complications.

Statistics
Exercise is one easy way to keep heart disease at bay.
Heart disease is the most common cause of death for both sexes. Here are some statistics demonstrating the scale of heart disease in the U.S.

Heart disease causes the deaths of around 630,000 people in the U.S. each year.
In the U.S., a person has a heart attack every 40 seconds, and at least one person dies per minute from an event related to heart problems.
The health burden placed by heart disease on the U.S. economy is around $200 billion.
The most common type of heart disease is coronary heart disease.
Mississippi is the state with the highest rate of death from heart disease at 233.1 deaths per 100,000 members of the population. The state is closely followed by Oklahoma, Arkansas, Alabama, and Louisiana. Minnesota, Hawaii, and Colorado have the lowest rates.

Advances are being made every day in the research and treatment of heart disease.

A recent study, to be presented at 2018’s annual Radiological Society of North America meeting, has shown that fat distribution across the body increases the risk of heart disease and other cardiometabolic conditions in women.

The 69th Annual Conference of the Cardiological Society of India recently saw the presentation of findings that showed the risk of heart disease increase by 500 percent with baldness and gray hair in men.

Smoking just one cigarette each day can increase the risk of heart disease, according to a new study in the BMJ. The research suggests that cutting out cigarettes completely is the only way to reduce this risk, as opposed to simply cutting down the number of cigarettes.

In other news, a study in the New England Journal of Medicine has linked flu to heart attacks in groups of people who are at risk of heart disease.

A new study also suggests that restless leg syndrome (RLS) may also increase the risk of death from heart-related conditions, especially in older women.

To keep up with the developments on heart disease, click here for all the latest news and research.

What are the different types of heart disease?
Heart disease encompasses a wide range of cardiovascular problems. Several diseases and conditions fall under the umbrella of heart disease. Types of heart disease include:

Arrhythmia. An arrhythmia is a heart rhythm abnormality.
Atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a hardening of the arteries.
Cardiomyopathy. This condition causes the heart’s muscles to harden or grow weak.
Congenital heart defects. Congenital heart defects are heart irregularities that are present at birth.
Coronary artery disease (CAD). CAD is caused by the buildup of plaque in the heart’s arteries. It’s sometimes called ischemic heart disease.
Heart infections. Heart infections may be caused by bacteria, viruses, or parasites.
The term cardiovascular disease may be used to refer to heart conditions that specifically affect the blood vessels.

Different types of heart disease may result in a variety of different symptoms.

Arrhythmias
Arrhythmias are abnormal heart rhythms. The symptoms you experience may depend on the type of arrhythmia you have — heartbeats that are too fast or too slow. Symptoms of an arrhythmia include:

lightheadedness
fluttering heart or racing heartbeat
slow pulse
fainting spells
dizziness
chest pain
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis reduces blood supply to your extremities. In addition to chest pain and shortness of breath, symptoms of atherosclerosis include:

coldness, especially in the limbs
numbness, especially in the limbs
unusual or unexplained pain
weakness in your legs and arms
Congenital heart defects
Congenital heart defects are heart problems that develop when a fetus is growing. Some heart defects are never diagnosed. Others may be found when they cause symptoms, such as:

blue-tinged skin
swelling of the extremities
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
fatigue and low energy
irregular heart rhythm
Coronary artery disease (CAD)
CAD is plaque buildup in the arteries that move oxygen-rich blood through the heart and lungs. Symptoms of CAD include:

chest pain or discomfort
a feeling of pressure or squeezing in the chest
shortness of breath
nausea
feelings of indigestion or gas
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathy is a disease that causes the muscles of the heart to grow larger and turn rigid, thick, or weak. Symptoms of this condition include:

fatigue
bloating
swollen legs, especially ankles and feet
shortness of breath
pounding or rapid pulse
Heart infections
The term heart infection may be used to describe conditions such as endocarditis or myocarditis. Symptoms of a heart infection include:

chest pain
chest congestion or coughing
fever
chills
skin rash

Women often experience different signs and symptoms of heart disease than men, specifically with regards to CAD and other cardiovascular diseases.

In fact, a 2003 study looked at the symptoms most often seen in women who’d experienced a heart attack. The top symptoms didn’t include “classic” heart attack symptoms such as chest pain and tingling. Instead, the study reported that women were more likely to say they experienced anxiety, sleep disturbances, and unusual or unexplained fatigue.

What’s more, 80 percent of the women in the study reported experiencing these symptoms for at least one month before their heart attack occurred.

Symptoms of heart disease in women can also be confused with other conditions, such as depression, menopause, and anxiety.

Common heart disease symptoms in women include:

dizziness
paleness
shortness of breath or shallow breathing
lightheadedness
fainting or passing out
anxiety
nausea
vomiting
jaw pain
neck pain
back pain
indigestion or gaslike pain in the chest and stomach
cold sweats
Read more about the common signs and symptoms of heart disease in women — and find out why many women say they wouldn’t call 911 if they thought they were having a heart attack.

Women often experience different signs and symptoms of heart disease than men, specifically with regards to CAD and other cardiovascular diseases.

In fact, a 2003 study looked at the symptoms most often seen in women who’d experienced a heart attack. The top symptoms didn’t include “classic” heart attack symptoms such as chest pain and tingling. Instead, the study reported that women were more likely to say they experienced anxiety, sleep disturbances, and unusual or unexplained fatigue.

What’s more, 80 percent of the women in the study reported experiencing these symptoms for at least one month before their heart attack occurred.

Symptoms of heart disease in women can also be confused with other conditions, such as depression, menopause, and anxiety.

Common heart disease symptoms in women include:

dizziness
paleness
shortness of breath or shallow breathing
lightheadedness
fainting or passing out
anxiety
nausea
vomiting
jaw pain
neck pain
back pain
indigestion or gaslike pain in the chest and stomach
cold sweats
Read more about the common signs and symptoms of heart disease in women — and find out why many women say they wouldn’t call 911 if they thought they were having a heart attack.

Heart disease is a collection of diseases and conditions that cause cardiovascular problems. Each type of heart disease is caused by something entirely unique to that condition. Atherosclerosis and CAD result from plaque buildup in the arteries. Other causes of heart disease are described below.

Arrhythmia causes
Causes of an abnormal heart rhythm include:

diabetes
CAD
heart defects, including congenital heart defects
medications, supplements, and herbal remedies
high blood pressure (hypertension)
excessive alcohol or caffeine use
substance use disorders
stress and anxiety
existing heart damage or disease
Congenital heart defect causes
This heart disease occurs while a baby is still developing in the womb. Some heart defects may be serious and diagnosed and treated early. Some may also go undiagnosed for many years.

Your heart’s structure can also change as you age. This can create a heart defect that may lead to complications and problems.

Cardiomyopathy causes
Several types of cardiomyopathy exist. Each type is the result of a separate condition.

Dilated cardiomyopathy. It’s unclear what causes this most common type of cardiomyopathy, which leads to a weakened heart. It may be the result of previous damage to the heart, such as the kind caused by drugs, infections, and heart attack. It may also be an inherited condition or the result of uncontrolled blood pressure.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This type of heart disease leads to a thicker heart muscle. It’s usually inherited.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy. It’s often unclear what leads to this type of cardiomyopathy, which results in rigid heart walls. Possible causes may include scar tissue buildup and a type of abnormal protein buildup known as amyloidosis.
Heart infection causes
Bacteria, parasites, and viruses are the most common causes of heart infections. Uncontrolled infections in the body can also harm the heart if they’re not properly treated.

There are many risk factors for heart disease. Some are controllable, and others aren’t. The CDC says that around 47 percentTrusted Source of Americans have at least one risk factor for heart disease. Some of these risk factors include:

high blood pressure
high cholesterol and low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), the “good” cholesterol
smoking
obesity
physical inactivity
Smoking, for example, is a controllable risk factor. People who smoke double their risk of developing heart disease, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK).

People with diabetes may also be at higher risk for heart disease because high blood glucose levels increase the risk of:

angina
heart attack
stroke
CAD
If you have diabetes, it’s essential to control your glucose to limit your risk for developing heart disease. The American Heart Association (AHA) reports that people who have both high blood pressure and diabetes double their risk for cardiovascular disease.

Risk factors you can’t control
Other risk factors for heart disease include:

family history
ethnicity
sex
age
Although these risk factors aren’t controllable, you may be able to monitor their effects. According to the Mayo Clinic, a family history of CAD is especially concerning if it involved a:

male relative under 55 years old, such as a father or brother
female relative under 65 years old, such as a mother or sister
Non-Hispanic blacks, non-Hispanic whites, and people of Asian or Pacific Island heritage have a higher risk than Native Alaskans or Native Americans. Also, men are at greater risk for heart disease than women. In fact, the CDC estimates between 70 and 89 percentTrusted Source of all cardiac events in the United States occur in men.

Finally, your age can increase your risk for heart disease. From ages 20 to 59, men and women are at a similar risk for CAD. After age 60, however, the percentage of men affected rises to between 19.9 and 32.2 percent. Only 9.7 to 18.8 percent of women that age are affected.

Your doctor may order several types of tests and evaluations to make a heart disease diagnosis. Some of these tests can be performed before you ever show signs of heart disease. Others may be used to look for possible causes of symptoms when they develop.

Physical exams and blood tests
The first thing your doctor will do is perform a physical exam and take an account of the symptoms you’ve been experiencing. Then they’ll want to know your family and personal medical history. Genetics can play a role in some heart diseases. If you have a close family member with heart disease, share this information with your doctor.

Blood tests are frequently ordered. This is because they can help your doctor see your cholesterol levels and look for signs of inflammation.

Noninvasive tests
A variety of noninvasive tests may be used to diagnose heart disease.

Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG). This test can monitor your heart’s electrical activity and help your doctor spot any irregularities.
Echocardiogram. This ultrasound test can give your doctor a close picture of your heart’s structure.
Stress test. This exam is performed while you complete a strenuous activity, such as walking, running, or riding a stationary bike. During the test, your doctor can monitor your heart’s activity in response to changes in physical exertion.
Carotid ultrasound. To get a detailed ultrasound of your carotid arteries, your doctor may order this ultrasound test.
Holter monitor. Your doctor may ask you to wear this heart rate monitor for 24 to 48 hours. It allows them to get an extended view of your heart’s activity.
Tilt table test. If you’ve recently experienced fainting or lightheadedness when standing up or sitting down, your doctor may order this test. During it, you’re strapped to a table and slowly raised or lowered while they monitor your heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen levels.
CT scan. This imaging test gives your doctor a highly-detailed X-ray image of your heart.
Heart MRI. Like a CT scan, a heart MRI can provide a very detailed image of your heart and blood vessels.
Invasive tests
If a physical exam, blood tests, and noninvasive tests aren’t conclusive, your doctor may want to look inside your body to determine what’s causing any unusual symptoms. Invasive tests may include:

Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography. Your doctor may insert a catheter into your heart through the groin and arteries. The catheter will help them perform tests involving the heart and blood vessels. Once this catheter is in your heart, your doctor can perform a coronary angiography. During a coronary angiography, a dye is injected into the delicate arteries and capillaries surrounding the heart. The dye helps produce a highly detailed X-ray image.
Electrophysiology study. During this test, your doctor may attach electrodes to your heart through a catheter. When the electrodes are in place, your doctor can send electric pulses through and record how the heart responds.
Read more about the tests that are used to diagnose heart disease.

What treatments are available for heart disease?
Treatment for heart disease largely depends on the type of heart disease you have as well as how far it has advanced. For example, if you have a heart infection, your doctor is likely to prescribe an antibiotic.

If you have plaque buildup, they may take a two-pronged approach: prescribe a medication that can help lower your risk for additional plaque buildup and look to help you adopt healthy lifestyle changes.

Treatment for heart disease falls into three main categories:

Lifestyle changes
Healthy lifestyle choices can help you prevent heart disease. They can also help you treat the condition and prevent it from getting worse. Your diet is one of the first areas you may seek to change.

A low-sodium, low-fat diet that’s rich in fruits and vegetables may help you lower your risk for heart disease complications. One example is the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet.

Likewise, getting regular exercise and quitting tobacco can help treat heart disease. Also look to reduce your alcohol consumption.

Medications
A medication may be necessary to treat certain types of heart disease. Your doctor can prescribe a medication that can either cure or control your heart disease. Medications may also be prescribed to slow or stop the risk for complications. The exact drug you’re prescribed depends on the type of heart disease you have. Read more about the drugs that may be prescribed to treat heart disease.

Surgery or invasive procedures
In some cases of heart disease, surgery or a medical procedure is necessary to treat the condition and prevent worsening symptoms.

For example, if you have arteries that are blocked entirely or almost completely by plaque buildup, your doctor may insert a stent in your artery to return regular blood flow. The procedure your doctor will perform depends on the type of heart disease you have and the extent of damage to your heart.

Some risk factors for heart disease can’t be controlled, like your family history, for example. But it’s still important to lower your chance of developing heart disease by decreasing the risk factors that you can control.

Aim for healthy blood pressure and cholesterol numbers
Having healthy blood pressure and cholesterol ranges are some of the first steps you can take for a healthy heart. Blood pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). A healthy blood pressure is considered less than 120 systolic and 80 diastolic, which is often expressed as “120 over 80” or “120/80 mm Hg.” Systolic is the measurement of pressure while the heart is contracting. Diastolic is the measurement when the heart is resting. Higher numbers indicate that the heart is working too hard to pump blood.

Your ideal cholesterol level will depend on your risk factors and heart health history. If you’re at a high risk of heart disease, have diabetes, or have already had a heart attack, your target levels will be below those of people with low or average risk.

Find ways to manage stress
As simple as it sounds, managing stress can also lower your risk for heart disease. Don’t underestimate chronic stress as a contributor to heart disease. Speak with your doctor if you’re frequently overwhelmed, anxious, or are coping with stressful life events, such as moving, changing jobs, or going through a divorce.

Embrace a healthier lifestyle
Eating healthy foods and exercising regularly are also important. Make sure to avoid foods high in saturated fat and salt. Doctors recommend 30 to 60 minutes of exerciseTrusted Source on most days for a total of 2 hours and 30 minutes each week. Check with your doctor to make sure you can safely meet these guidelines, especially if you already have a heart condition.

If you smoke, stop. The nicotine in cigarettes causes blood vessels to constrict, making it harder for oxygenated blood to circulate. This can lead to atherosclerosis.

Learn more about ways you can lower your risk for and possibly prevent heart disease.

What lifestyle changes does heart disease require?
If you’ve recently received a heart disease diagnosis, talk to your doctor about steps you can take to stay as healthy as possible. You can prepare for your appointment by creating a detailed list of your everyday habits. Possible topics include:

medications you take
your regular exercise routine
your typical diet
any family history of heart disease or stroke
personal history of high blood pressure or diabetes
any symptoms you’re experiencing, such as a racing heart, dizziness, or lack of energy
Seeing your doctor regularly is just one lifestyle habit you can take up. If you do, any potential issues can be caught as early as possible. Certain risk factors, such as high blood pressure, may be addressed with medications to lower your risk of heart disease.

Your doctor may also provide tips for:

quitting smoking
controlling blood pressure
exercising regularly
maintaining healthy cholesterol levels
losing weight if you’re overweight
eating healthy
Making these changes all at once might not be possible. Discuss with your healthcare provider which lifestyle changes will have the biggest impact. Even small steps toward these goals will help keep you at your healthiest.