There are two main lines of treatment for heart disease. Initially, a person can attempt to treat the heart condition using medications. If these do not have the desired effect, surgical options are available to help correct the issue.

Medication
A very wide range of medication is available for the majority of heart conditions. Many are prescribed to prevent blood clots, but some serve other purposes.

The main medications in use are:

statins, for lowering cholesterol
blood thinners, such as warfarin, for preventing blood clots
beta-blockers, for treating heart attack, heart failure, and high blood pressure
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, for heart failure and high blood pressure
Your doctor will work with you to find a medication that is safe and effective. They will also use medications to treat underlying conditions that can affect the heart, such as diabetes before they become problematic.

Surgery
Heart surgery is an option for people with heart disease, but it can be debilitating.
Heart surgery is an intensive option from which it can take a long time to recover.

However, they can be effective in treating blockages and heart problems for which medications may not be effective, especially in the advanced stages of heart disease.

The most common surgeries include:

angioplasty, in which a balloon catheter is inserted to widen narrowed blood vessels that might be restricting blood flow to the heart
coronary artery bypass surgery, which allows blood flow to reach a blocked part of the heart in people with blocked arteries
surgery to repair or replace faulty heart valves
pacemakers, or electronic machines that regulate a heartbeat for people with arrhythmia
Heart transplants are another option. However, it is often difficult to find a suitable heart of the right size and blood type in the required time. People are put on a waiting list for donor organs and can sometimes wait years.

Prevention
Some types of heart disease, such as those that are present from birth, cannot be prevented.

Other types, however, can be prevented by taking the following measures:

Eat a balanced diet. Stick to low-fat, high-fiber foods and be sure to consume five portions of fresh fruit and vegetables each day. Increase your intake of whole grains and reduce the amount of salt and sugar in the diet. Make sure the fats in the diet are mostly unsaturated.
Exercise regularly. This will strengthen the heart and circulatory system, reduce cholesterol, and maintain blood pressure.
Maintain a healthy body weight for your height. Click here to calculate your current and target body mass index (BMI).
If you smoke, quit. Smoking is a major risk factor for heart and cardiovascular conditions.
Reduce the intake of alcohol. Do not drink more than 14 units per week.
Control conditions that affect heart health as a complication, such as high blood pressure or diabetes.
While these steps do not completely eliminate the risk of heart disease, they can help improve overall health and greatly reduce the chances of heart complications.