There are many risk factors for heart disease. Some are controllable, and others aren’t. The CDC says that around 47 percentTrusted Source of Americans have at least one risk factor for heart disease. Some of these risk factors include:

high blood pressure
high cholesterol and low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), the “good” cholesterol
smoking
obesity
physical inactivity
Smoking, for example, is a controllable risk factor. People who smoke double their risk of developing heart disease, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK).

People with diabetes may also be at higher risk for heart disease because high blood glucose levels increase the risk of:

angina
heart attack
stroke
CAD
If you have diabetes, it’s essential to control your glucose to limit your risk for developing heart disease. The American Heart Association (AHA) reports that people who have both high blood pressure and diabetes double their risk for cardiovascular disease.

Risk factors you can’t control
Other risk factors for heart disease include:

family history
ethnicity
sex
age
Although these risk factors aren’t controllable, you may be able to monitor their effects. According to the Mayo Clinic, a family history of CAD is especially concerning if it involved a:

male relative under 55 years old, such as a father or brother
female relative under 65 years old, such as a mother or sister
Non-Hispanic blacks, non-Hispanic whites, and people of Asian or Pacific Island heritage have a higher risk than Native Alaskans or Native Americans. Also, men are at greater risk for heart disease than women. In fact, the CDC estimates between 70 and 89 percentTrusted Source of all cardiac events in the United States occur in men.

Finally, your age can increase your risk for heart disease. From ages 20 to 59, men and women are at a similar risk for CAD. After age 60, however, the percentage of men affected rises to between 19.9 and 32.2 percent. Only 9.7 to 18.8 percent of women that age are affected.